super intelligence was written by Nick
Bostrom in 2014. it's been almost a
decade now since that book was published
it was published two years after an
article written by David Deutsche I'll
put in the next chat published in hang
on magazine titled creative blocks that
was in 2012 by David deutschen was about
the possibility of artificial general
intelligence David Deutsch had written
the beginning of infinity some years
before this developing work began by
kalpapa on conjectural knowledge
epistemology the explanation of how
knowledge can be created what entities
can create knowledge and this led David
Deutsch to the important conclusion that
people a special case of which is the
human being another special case of
which is the artificial general
intelligence or alien life all of these
things have in common the capacity to
explain the world in other words the
capacity to create knowledge this means
that people and what a person is is
intimately tied to epistemology and what
knowledge can be created and how it can
possibly be created is constrained by an
understanding of epistemology it's
self-constrained by what it is possible
to compute because understanding what
brains do is a kind of computation
and so I read super intelligence and was
struck by a number of things so much so
that one of the first articles I
produced on my website is this one right
here which was a critique of the book
super intelligence so as I say David
wrote this article in 2012 one year
after the publication at the beginning
of infinity and both the book and the
article align on how it is knowledge is
created following the conjectural nature
of knowledge the relationship between
people and knowledge of people being
universally capable of explaining that
which is explicable and this follows
from universality of computation it's a
different kind of universality but all
it is is a denial of the supernatural it
says that the world is comprehensible
there's nothing incomprehensible in the
world
that article all about the possibility
of artificial general intelligence the
difference between artificial general
intelligence and regular artificial
intelligence which is now thought of as
merely being narrow in the sense that it
really only is able to perform a finite
list of functions tasks it can't think
like a person but an AGI can precisely
because it is a person certainly in
David deutsche's conception of what a
person is namely a universal explainer
Deutsch admits as would I that
artificial general intelligence could
pose a danger just as your next door
neighbor could pose a danger just as a
child could pose a danger a teenager
could pose a danger people compose a
danger if they have the wrong ideas and
AGI is just like that but it's not a
special kind of danger although people
argue that but the Deutsche explains
grounded in physics and epistemology and
the possibility of creating knowledge
how it is that knowledge is created in
fact the only way that knowledge can
possibly be created
Deutsche has through this and prevents a
vision of the world that isn't mired in
concerns about existential threats but
rather an optimistic view about the
possibility of creativity and how it is
creativity solves our problems
so I went into reading super
intelligence bunny Bostrom with this
background
thinking to myself well Nick Bostrom an
Oxford philosopher author of this new
book superintelligence I was excited to
read it what would he have to say about
this because I'd heard great praise for
the book by luminaries such as Sam
Harris and thought well if smart people
are saying that this book is really
groundbreaking in the kinds of things
that it says about super intelligence
and we should be really worried about
this coming technological shift possibly
technological apocalypse then I should
certainly read this and I read it and
then I listened to the audiobook and I
had a Sinking Feeling
not about what Boston was warning us
about in terms of the existential threat
of AGI but a sinking feeling that
Bostrom didn't understand his own field
of expertise and this was a great
Revelation to me
who am I it's a dare question an Oxford
philosopher on philosophy and
epistemology in particular
well who am I except someone who's read
Karl Popper and David Deutsche on this
and was simply doing a comparison
between what I knew to be the case from
physics and epistemology and comparing
it to what Bostrom had written in this
book super intelligence and so I was
driven to write this critique it was one
of the first things that I ever put on
my website
I wrote it almost straight after the
book itself was published
superintelligence was published and as I
say I read the book multiple times in
particular I listened to the audiobook
and I found that disconcerting whoever
the reader was founded for all the world
like a super intelligence I would
imagine in a sort of mechanical kind of
creepy way of reading
I was just immediately struck by
how
terribly naive the epistemology was and
the philosophy was
I thought
Bostrom this great philosopher held up
as being the expert on super
intelligence
simply misunderstood how knowledge was
created what people were and why things
were dangerous
although we agreed on certain
fundamentals we disagreed on others and
this led to Boston rich in conclusions
that I thought students start contrast
to what physics and philosophy were
telling us about reality
but at the time 10 years ago now the
publication of superintelligence binding
Boston
it was just a curiosity intellectually
speaking the domain of a strange
subculture of nerdy Tech types concerned
about this kind of thing and worried
philosophers who hosted podcasts
and people like me who consumed all of
this stuff
I didn't really think it was having an
effect on the culture I thought well one
day it might but before it does we're
going to figure all this stuff out in
particular David deutsche's ideas are
going to get out there and be able to
combat in the culture this growing
pessimism about technology which is what
it is no different to people's concerns
about the printing press automation
factories in general whatever it is that
supposedly takes away jobs from people
but of course we know that every time 10
jobs are taken away by automation 50
more are created in order to produce the
thing that does the Automation in the
first place to come up with creative new
ideas taking people away from the
drudgery of the work that the robots now
do all the factory does and giving them
jobs in Creative Industries programming
and writing and all that sort of stuff
so it seemed obvious to me at least that
the lesson would be learned quickly
simply by observing the world this of
course is an empiricist mistake that
people are not persuaded by just looking
at reality instead they are persuaded by
ideas and explanations
if they're convinced by bad ideas and
explanations then observations won't
sway them even if those observations
stands that contrast to what they're
thinking because what they regard as the
explanation of the world is for them a
good explanation of the world and
accounts for even the observations they
see out there in the world that would
otherwise contradict what they're
thinking in other words what I'm saying
is if you think that technology is going
to take over the world and take
everyone's jobs the fact that people
keep experiencing gainful employment we
keep on producing more jobs it's not a
refutation of your idea because your
idea is that eventually all the jobs
will be lost eventually the disaster
will come so you're not refuted by the
trend of increasing employment and how
things are getting better for everyone
similarly consistently
these were all concerns about a certain
kind of nerdy fearful somewhat angry
subculture of people
talking about the end times a little bit
crazy sounding who would take these
people seriously well as I say podcast
hosts that kind of thing but not exactly
the mainstream media not yet they were
too distracted by climate change
concerns about global politics they
weren't concerned about the coming AI
apocalypse not yet anyway and I didn't
really think it was going to happen as I
say surely there would be a collision
between people like Nick Bostrom who got
all the philosophy and epistemology
wrong and therefore the conclusions
about what AGI would be like and the
possibility of cycle superintelligence I
thought that would all be refuted by
better ideas eventually when the time
came if the time indeed came
but that isn't what has happened Nick
bostrom's ideas under good all of what
is being said now in the media and on
Twitter and driving people now who have
even larger profiles than even Nick
Bostrom
the reason Sam Harris says what he says
on his podcast about the dangers of AI
is because of Nick Bostrom the reason
why Elon Musk says what he says about
the dangers of AI is because of
nikbostrum and
eligible but the reason why yukowski
says what he says is in large part
because of Nick Bostrom these people
talk about Nick Bostrom and his
philosophy because he's an academic he's
the expert he's an Oxford professor and
philosopher if you believe in the
authority of experts then what greater
expert could you have than a professor
of philosophy specializing in this field
and not only that but at possibly the
most prestigious institution on the
planet Oxford University
it hasn't remained in this angry fearful
geeky subculture it's now out there and
not merely on social media now it's
reached the mainstream and now Nick
Bostrom is definitely out there on
mainstream media telling people about
the end times that are coming let's just
hear an example a very recent example of
what kind of effect this is having
on the Zeitgeist the genuine Zeitgeist
the way people are feeling about this
issue what the media is thinking about
this issue which means what governments
are going to think about this issue
politicians are going to think about
this issue and therefore What
legislation is eventually going to come
what regulation is going to come and
that is what is going to affect everyone
in a really detrimental way but before
we get there let's just listen to the
people in their own words but it does
raise this important question
is the jobs of
us everyone from Dr
new technology that's faster and more
intelligent than the average human but a
little bit result in this dystopian
future where we'll be slaves to AI
overlords the remote you took a while to
bring us from the shackles of nine to
five living free to pursue more
leisurely activities so there's the
introduction by the journalist normally
this program will be hosted by Piers
Morgan but for whatever reason tonight
he's not there and so there is a guest
host and she has just made it clear that
AI could be a threat so she's presented
the dystopian view but the only
alternative to that apparently to us
being as she says slaves to AI overlords
sort of got a rice smile on her mouth
that she says they're still not taking
that quite seriously that's fine but the
alternative is freeing is from the
shackles of nine to five okay that's
good not all of us are in those shackles
anyway but living free to pursue more
leisurely activities well hold on a
minute the alternatives are not
or you're just on a permanent holiday of
some sort no there is important work to
do the important work is creativity and
solving problems that won't change
that's the real work okay so some people
don't want to call that work I don't I
want to say that's what actually work is
never mind laborious drudge work that's
not what human beings are about what
we're about is creative work fun work
that won't change in fact that'll only
become more important to be able to
figure out what to tell the AI to do and
so far it's AGI what they're going to
help is they're going to be people as
well also using AI here to discuss all
of this AI can direct to the future of
humanity Institute at Oxford University
Professor Nick Foster and Nick thank you
ever so much for making time to speak to
us and you know I know we can never
simplify this and talk about sort of
robots taking our jobs it seems to be
that's what the media most grasps onto
but uh give us a sense of the power of
AI if you could
well I think we are just at the early
stages of what might become the biggest
transition in human history the arrival
of the machine intelligence era um long
ago we had sort of automated a lot of
human physical labor
um first to draft animals and then with
steam engines and so forth and now we're
starting to automate human cognitive
labor
um how dangerous is that to replicate
cognitive behavior so Nick Bostrom has
been introduced by the host as being an
AI skeptic of course he's not a skeptic
about the possibility of AI he's just a
skeptic about whether or not it's going
to be beneficial for humankind
has said there to be the director of the
future of humanity Institute at Oxford
University
so these academics that talk about the
end times the modern version of
Armageddon the apocalypse the prophecies
in Revelation that kind of thing but
always with a bit of technical spin on
things
they have these institutes I don't like
to use this word but I'm going to it's a
grift it's an academic intellectual
drift it's a way of listing all the ways
in which civilization is going to end so
that you can charge consultancy fees to
government business in the hope that
somehow or other your advice to them
about the ways in which the world might
end is going to somehow be of benefit to
them in forming policy
they all do it so Nick Bostrom has a
future of humanity Institute will
mccaskill of the effective altruism
movement also Oxford University he works
at the global priorities Institute and
so again the idea here is let's talk
about the future and what we should be
prioritizing and of course all these
people have the same prescriptions for
what should be done more government more
Authority we need to get together as a
globe and come up with a unified
approach to these things
Max TIG Mark Max tegmark has the very
friendly sounding positive sounding
future of Life Institute that he's the
president of again it's the same idea
talking about all the ways in which the
world might end and how he as a
cosmologist can give you advice on how
to avoid the end times
they're all doing the same thing it's
all the same kind of grift here allow me
to use my expertise as a physicist or a
philosopher to tell you what the future
is going to bring
I'm a prophet I can see what you the
plebeian without my training and my
credit my credentials I can see and
understand better what the future will
bring
but here we're talking about Bostrom and
Bostrom in this particular interview
here the interviewer there has talked
about how AI the standard stuff about
how AI is going to take away our jobs
and we're going to be all left
unemployed okay but also at the end
there concerns about how dangerous it is
to replicate the cognitive behavior of
human beings so it's all couched in
danger well there wouldn't be a media
story if we didn't have fears it's all
driven by fear after all so much of the
media it's not so much fact-based as
fear-based what are the concerns what
should we be worried about not what
should we be hopeful for and what
exciting things lie ahead when it comes
to technology apparently that's not
marketable maybe not delay any longer
let's listen to what Nick Bostrom
himself has to say about this well I
don't argue that this development of
machine general intelligence and as I
think shortly thereafter machine super
intelligence will be associated with
significant existential risks like
threats to the very survival of the
human species
um also however I think if we get it
right uh it presents tremendous
opportunities to to solve you know a
very wide range of different problems
that have plagued Humanity uh throughout
our history so he's long argued he
certainly has that machine
superintelligence will be associated
with significant existential risks like
the very survival of human species he
also thinks that that will come soon
after machine general intelligence but
what do we know about what general
intelligence is what general
intelligence is it's called General
because of its universality its capacity
to understand anything that is
comprehensible and what is
comprehensible is the universe the laws
of physics mandate their own
comprehensibility I can get into that
but it follows both from the University
of computation and the universality of
the human mind this is what general
intelligence is we possess it you can't
be more Universal than Universal and if
you want to speed up the rate at which
you can do calculations then you've got
the pocket calculator computer if you
want to increase your amount of memory
then you can write things down on paper
or story in a computer these things
augment our capacity to be Universal to
make our capacity to think more quickly
to store more information from what we
otherwise would in our brains we can
store it out there in the world but we
don't become more Universal than
Universal why does any of this matter it
matters because it comes from
epistemology and understanding of what
epistemology is
the creation of knowledge hand knowledge
can be created what universality is and
therefore the meaning of general
intelligence is and if you understand
that which follows from physics and
epistemology
then you know there can be no such thing
as so-called super intelligence it can't
be more Universal than Universal we've
already got that the capacity to
understand anything that's
understandable and everything is
understandable I've made videos about
this before I've gone to Great Lengths
to try and unpack what David Deutsche
said about this in various places the
simple fact is that we are already at
the peak of intelligence I know people
deny this but they deny this just from
an argument from incredulity they can't
believe how it could be otherwise but if
you understand
the relevant physics and the relevant
epistemology you understand there can be
nothing more than Universal that's what
Universal means everything in the
repertoire that could be understood can
be understood by us in principle
what people think about super
intelligence is that it's something more
than this in other words it's an appeal
not to Super intelligence but to the
supernatural something that flies free
of the laws of physics
but as rational people grounded in
realism we should reject this Nick
Bostrom is not doing this
his idea of superintelligence is based
in the Supernatural his idea of super
intelligence is based upon a false
epistemology a long refuted epistemology
the modern incantation of which is
Bayesian epistemology it's all wrong it
was refuted by Papa it's been refuted
Again by Deutsche I've explained these
refutations in various places but people
are still committed to this Supernatural
idea of intelligence as if although you
wouldn't believe in God because that's
ridiculous that's Supernatural that you
will believe in the God made out of
silicon ships the superintelligence of
the hair and that because it's basically
got all the qualities of God except that
it's evil it's a threat to the very
survival of the human species as he says
there
but let's add to all of this the very
fact that Bostrom like tegmark like
mccaskill like everyone engaged in this
kind of concern about the future and is
very willing to get on TV as quickly as
possible to tell us about the future
they can't help but engage in Prophecy
even when he's trying to present a
positive picture which is just sort of a
throwaway along his Central messages of
course the threat to the very survival
human species which is a prophecy about
the future uncoupled from science even
when he says quote
I think if we get it right it presents
tremendous opportunities to solve a wide
range of different problems that applied
Humanity throughout history end quote
yes that's also a claim about the future
so we can't help but make this kind
about the future the AI is going to
solve a very wide range of problems but
that's only because we are actually the
thing that is solving it it's just
another tool science itself is the thing
that presents opportunities to solve a
very wide range of different problems
computers present the opportunity to
solve a very wide ranging problems most
important of all human beings do this
ioi is just another tool that's all it
is and we can use tools for creating or
for destroying that's up to us but not
the AI itself it doesn't make decisions
and choices insofar as it can make
genuine choices insofar as it can
construct knowledge of its own that
makes it not a silicon system that
performs tasks that we should be afraid
of but rather another person we can
collaborate with and this is what
Bostrom doesn't understand and he
doesn't explain that here because he
doesn't understand it he's fixated on
telling the world about the dangers and
why
let me be clear I think it is largely
because there is money in this telling
people about the dangers means they're
going to turn to you for Solutions even
if you don't have any and therein lies
the grift the consultancy fees the
demand to appear especially on newscasts
the media wants to hear about the
frightening Prophecies of the future
people tune into that stuff it's like
watching a disaster movie you have
argued that the sentient machines are a
greater threat than climate change at
some point you stick by that
yeah that's that's my assessment
um I think
um both in terms of time scale um
there's a lot of uncertainty about that
but in the last several years progress
in AI has been really quite impressive
um and also about the risks even when we
do reach human equivalence and then
Super intelligence um it's just
something completely unprecedent I think
we've never developed super intelligence
before and uh I think we might only get
one try on this we need to get it right
on the first chart
um because once you have unfriendly
antagonistic superintelligence it might
not be possible to sort of put that
Genie back into the bottle
um so we've got to get it right for at
the first try and it looks quite
challenging to do that just to make sure
that it's aligned and does what we
actually wanted to do so she begins
there with quote you have argued that
sentient machines are great to threat
than climate change at some point do you
stick by that end quite so that's a
question I love this don't take the
media you want a threat you want the
concern you want the worry this is the
media just pointing out problems
for so long they've been fixated on
climate change this has been the reason
why we're going to need bigger and
bigger government more and more enforced
collaboration at the highest levels of
the United Nations in order to have
Global rules and Authority because we're
going to need this coordinated effort in
order to fix the climate fix the planet
fix the world okay so let's say that
doesn't pan out for them let's say that
people start to question the narrative
about climate change might be a little
bit too much of that going on
what do we have as a backup plan well
maybe this whole thing about Angi maybe
it's even better maybe it is a greater
threat than climate change and therefore
well it's even more urgent that we have
authoritarian type governments who can
save us from the impending doom
washerman answer to this question agrees
I guess indeed it could be a much worse
risk than climate changes and he thinks
we'll only get quote one shot we'll have
to get this right on the first shot
because once you have unfriendly
antagonistic superintelligence he says
it might not be possible to put that
Genie back into the bottle end quote in
other words some problems are not
soluble there are some things that once
they happen you can't fix them no matter
how much creativity you bring to bear so
if the AI goes Wayward that's it you
can't persuade it because apparently
it's not creative so it can't understand
your argument
but on the other you also can't switch
it off because it can out-think you
presumably because it is more creative
than you or something like that there's
this contradiction at the heart of what
Bostrom argues in super intelligence and
I'll go through that in my review
of what he says not only is the
pistamology force which is what was so
disappointing for me reading someone
who's a professional philosopher but the
argument itself just didn't stand up
because of this internal contradiction
that on the one hand the super
intelligence is a super intelligence
because it can always out think you it's
always more creative it's a faster
thinker it's a better thinker but on the
other it's not a more moral thinker it
can't improve morality it's dead set
committed to the destruction of the
human race for example
or it's just not creative at all in the
sense that it is dogmatically committed
to achieving its task by turning the
world into pay-per-clicks let's say and
it can't be swayed from doing that now
you can't switch it off Boston says
because well it's going to outthink you
as soon as you think you can switch it
off or you can shoot it with a gun or
whatever the thing is that you think you
can do to stop at doing what it's going
to do like turn the universe into
paperclips it is a better thinker than
you by the measure of no matter how
creative you are it's already thought
ahead 10 moves ahead but although it is
super creative it can't think why am I
doing any of this why am I turning the
universe into paper clips this is the
contradiction at the heart of his entire
worldview on this it makes no sense and
yet people listen to him because he's an
Oxford philosopher he's the one expert
on it this is a this is a very simple
error a very simple contradiction is the
thing creative or is it not if is we can
persuade it if it's not we can switch it
off you can't have it both ways but he
does he absolutely does all throughout
superintelligence and you know he says
things as he says right at the end
they're like it's quite challenging to
do that namely put the genie back into
the bottle stop the AI from becoming
Wayward and he says it looks quite
challenging to do that just to make sure
that it's aligned and does what we
actually want to do want it to do it
presumably into quotes so he wants to
make sure and he can't make sure if it's
an AGI but this is the way he thinks
this is what he wants from knowledge and
epistemology and from people certainty
he wants to be sure he endorses
Justified to believe as the conception
of knowledge by easy and prediction all
that sort of stuff it's all a complete
and utter error this from one of the top
philosophers on the planet supposedly
making pedestrian errors in simple
critical thinking okay so area is
everywhere but this is supposed to be
the world expert on this stuff it's
almost like what I compare it to is one
of the top physicists in the world not
understanding why Newtonian physics is
wrong not realizing there is this thing
called quantum theory much less general
relativity he's stuck in the past not
realizing that contradictions in the
world view that observations out there
not only refute what he's saying but
there's better explanations
that's what a physicist who would argue
for well look Newtonian gravity it works
and it's true
well this is what Bostrom is done with
his view on epistemology and AGI and
people and being certain being sure and
all this stuff it's the same level of
error it's disappointing and it does
sound terrifying this idea of super
intelligence I've seen it described as
god-like super intelligence I remember
having beers with a friend of years ago
and he's saying the thing I'm most
scared about super computers and I
thought he was off his rocket this was
probably about seven years ago he was
right back then how far along the curve
are we and how fast is the train going
in terms of being able to Reign it in if
we need to so the interview there admits
now to being terrified of
superintelligence some time ago she had
beers with a friend who seemed to have
knowledge about this stuff and he was
scared but she thought he was off his
rocker so she thought he was crazy at
that time but now she's been persuaded
presumably by people like Bostrom she's
hearing about it more so she's been
persuaded by the consensus which is why
I say that the pessimists are winning
the argument here he is a journalist not
an expert in the field thinking that it
was a crazy idea some time ago that the
super computers were terrifying but now
she's been persuaded and she's asking
for the expert who has predicted this
stuff all to go wrong what we should do
about it which is also a category error
let's say if Bostrom could predict what
was going to go wrong with super
intelligence does that then give him the
moral authority to say what should be
done about it how do you get import from
it is why would an expert in super
intelligence know what we should do
about super intelligence that's an
ethical question this is just another
interesting philosophical error that
tends to go on in these conversations as
well it's also interesting that when she
relays the conversation she had with her
friend which happened seven years ago
she says of him that although she
thought he was crazy at the time she
says now quote he was right back then
end quote how does she know that he was
right back then why again because she's
been persuaded now but why has she been
persuaded now because so many experts
so-called experts are converging on this
idea that super intelligence is
terrifying and the News absolutely loves
it I love a terrifying story people tune
in to listen to tales of the Apocalypse
but it's becoming more and more serious
they're taking it very seriously
but should we take it that seriously
that it's all going to go off the rails
perhaps but is this also terrifying to
Children is it terrifying in the same
way that climate change has been twisted
and contorted into this existential
threat I think so and this is why I
think that again the media is just like
a dog with a bone they pick one side of
the argument present that side of the
argument that becomes culture that
dictates policy that trade is going
really fast I mean everybody I've seen
these recent large language models with
Chiefs like almost every other day
there's like a big new release
um the image generation models like
everything you see in this picture is
artificial right the virtual backdrop
actually generated by one of these uh
daily 2 image generation models I'm not
even sure whether I'm real artificial
um and it looks like these current
algorithms generalize very well and
scale so you're pouring more compute you
pouring more data and they just seem to
reach high levels of performance with as
yet no player and insight
the posture begins there by speaking
about how the trend is going really fast
and on all of those facts we can
absolutely agree at the end though he
says so you pour in more compute you
pour in more data and they just seem to
reach higher levels of performance with
as yet no clear end in science now on
one hand of course he's true in the
trivial sense he's true these systems
will keep getting better and better and
better the chat GPT will become more and
more knowledgeable if you like about the
entire Corpus of human knowledge
everything we know will be placed within
its library for it to access for us for
it to access for us but it won't be
thinking about it itself they might be
creating new stuff to add to the library
when it does that of course then it will
be a general intelligence so there is a
limit to these particular things after
all they're following instructions
they're Unlimited in some ways but
limited in otherwise the clear end is
the capacity to generate explanatory
knowledge the capacity to disobey the
capacity not to perform the task that is
being programmed to do which includes
for example having conversations with
people
next clip is a little over a minute and
this one has Bostrom telling you or
providing you an insight into his
theories of economics
some of which I can agree with but other
parts of which well it hints at this
kind of authoritarian approach to the
way in which technology in particular
can be created in the environment in
which he thinks Innovation might
actually work
um there was an open letter being spread
around the technology in AI Community
Elon Musk was one of the signatories
saying we need to pause the development
of AI uh in order to assess some of
these risks you can see that we call
them all AI developers to stop this
immediately pause for at least six
months he's asking for the training of
AI systems more powerful than gpt4 I
believe that Bill Gates was actually not
one of the signatories of those and he
has made the case that we do need to
keep the development of AI up in the
west because otherwise we're going to
fall out of the race when it comes to
competing with China and obviously there
could be risks involved with that
yeah right now the the Western
particularly certain large Western tech
companies I think have a lead uh things
are quite competitive in this space um
also in terms of building the computer
hardware uh that is needed to run these
large AI models um the key producers of
that are in the United States in Taiwan
and in South Korea
um and recent export regulations have
tried to It's Time the sales of AI chips
into China so that might make it harder
uh for Chinese developers to uh to keep
up with The Cutting Edge I think
ultimately machine superintendent should
be developed I do think during the key
parts of the transition though it would
be wise to be able to do it carefully
and not have a sort of hyper competitive
situation where there are plenty
different companies that are each viring
to get their first and their whoever
decides to make some extra precautions
or to check their systems carefully just
immediately falls behind and the races
won by whoever is willing to take most
risks I think that would be a bad
situation so it's interesting he
understands that the West at the moment
Western tech companies have the lead
over China
I tend to think that they will always
have the lead and the reason why they
will always have the leaders precisely
because of the different cultures in the
two systems politically speaking if you
have an authoritarian political system
which stifles creativity in one area it
cannot but help to stifle creativity in
other areas it will always slow down
make people concerned about saying the
wrong thing doing the wrong thing asking
the wrong question for you they and
their family are going to be punished
this slows down innovation
this slows down Innovation across the
board scientifically and technologically
if you don't have proper Free Speech you
can't discuss ideas and you might very
well say well it's only because having
free speech in this area but not that
area that's not the way any of this
works it really isn't if people feel as
if they can't speak freely then they
won't and in fact it goes deep into that
it goes deep into the inexplicit ways
they think they think that they can't
even think about certain things because
they stop thinking about certain things
in case they accidentally say certain
things smart people end up developing
heuristics to avoid getting into trouble
this really does happen however
everything I said there is not perfect
there's no guarantee that people who are
allowed to think freely will always in
all cases everywhere out compete out
think people who are in some way living
under tyranny we are the good guys we
want to keep ahead of bad regimes we
might do bad things with new technology
we have an advantage but we want to keep
it as well and the advantage that we
have exists precisely because of Liberty
Freedom Free Speech free trade
competition it's competition and free
trade which allows us to have this
advantage of getting ahead of places
that don't have that
but Bostrom speaks pejoratively about
this entire system speaking of it as
hyper competitive whether 20 different
countries companies he says that are
each vying to get there first as if
that's a bad thing this is a good thing
this means that we can get there first
because we do have competition wearers
in China they have one way and one
approach he concludes his remarks there
by saying quote and whoever decides to
make some extra precautions or to check
their systems carefully just immediately
falls behind and the race is won by
whoever is willing to take most risks so
I think that would be a bad situation
end quote yes indeed and this is the
escape of the authoritarian this is the
appeal to pessimism this is the appeal
to top down bureaucracy that we
shouldn't be taking risks it's a
precautionary principle that which
hasn't been tried before comes with
risks so let's stick with what we
already know this is bostrom's
foundational philosophy whenever you
read about it in other areas whenever
he's talking about any other kind of
global existential threat he talks about
it in terms of the precautionary
principle unless we know that something
is sure to be fine then there's a risk
in destroying the world by trying it out
by trying out something new of course
there's a risk but it's also the only
possible way to solve problems and make
progress it's the only way to stay ahead
of people who would do us harm because
those people come from more static
societies they have memes which prevent
the means of error correction as soon as
you start saying look taking risks is a
bad thing that's an anti-rational meme
because once you start believing it you
cease to take as many risks you cease to
make progress as fast as you could have
you quickly become static in your
applicant civilization and if everyone
in your Society starts to think that way
then you've got a static Society so I
agree with him the race is won by
whoever is willing to take the most
risks but I take the opposite lesson
from this I think this is a good
situation it means we have the advantage
and we need more competitors we do not
need to take extra precautions as he
says we need to understand what we're
doing and then put in place restrictions
where we know they're required in other
words don't go putting your completely
untested AI system in charge of the
launching of nuclear weapons always
forevermore have a human being involved
in that decision never fully automate
your hugely destructive weapon systems
never do that that could be a moral
Maxim that we might want to put in place
that's just an example of the kind of
thing I'm talking about but when it
comes to making progress in this area of
artificial intelligence or anywhere else
we want to be the people who are taking
the most risks the most risks as in
coming up with the Bold conjecture the
risky conjecture the idea people haven't
thought of before that's what we want we
want multiple companies multiple people
lots of different thinkers all thinking
different things trying out different
things taking risks taking risk is a
good thing but maybe of course this is a
subtle difference between an American
way of thinking and a European way of
thinking or perhaps I should say The
British Enlightenment way of thinking
and the European Continental
Enlightenment way of thinking
so having some ability to coordinate I'm
going to get to slow down for a few
months I think that could be a positive
yeah ideally you'd want it to happen in
concert but of course in the real world
companies compete in countries compete
and this idea of having one of the most
consequential technological impacts on
Earth as you as you sort of laid out at
the beginning of our conversation just
how severe it could be and all these
decisions being made by a small handful
of tech companies private companies
don't regular people deserve say in this
so there we have it this is prescription
and as I say having read a lot of
bostrom's work at the time his
prescription for these things is always
the same having some ability to
coordinate maybe slow down for a few
months that could be a positive it
always comes down to some top-down
authoritarian committee slowing things
down this is why yukowski and all those
other people talk about slowing things
down pausing technological progress
knowledge creation
the pessimists of old garbed in techno
speak don't let it fool you just because
they happen to have the capacity to have
the conversation about AI in terms that
technically proficient people understand
and appreciate doesn't mean their ideas
aren't from a bygone era philosophically
speaking don't trust people it's the
message slow things down we can't be
trusted we don't know the average person
is too stupid et cetera et cetera et
cetera this whole idea of maybe slowing
down for a few months that could be a
positive but a moment ago he was just
talking about how we're competing with
the Chinese are they going to slow down
the one thing that will guarantee us
losing is slowing down
and by losing we really do mean losing
we mean that the authoritarian
dictatorships will end up producing the
AI that can do stuff that is actually
going to be able to cause that damage in
terms of security
at the end of that little snippet I'll
just play it he says there quote all
these decisions being made by a small
handful of tech companies private
companies don't regular people deserve a
say in this end quote
translation shouldn't the government be
in charge and not private companies
shouldn't the collective be in control
and not the individual
I want the small handful of tech
companies to be in charge of this the
private companies because they know what
they're doing they know what they're
talking about I do not want politicians
and philosophers in this case in charge
of this stuff when they don't know what
they're talking about
Bostrom doesn't know what he's talking
about when it comes to this particular
philosophy this particular area of
philosophy the one that he seems to have
spent most of his time on he's got
completely the wrong end of the stick
and if he hasn't then he's completely
ignoring the other side of the argument
which I'm happy to say people on our
side of the argument are not doing we
are taking the time to try and
understand what the prevailing view is
and my goodness isn't it prevailing here
he is here he is on mainstream media
telling the world about how dangerous
this stuff might be but really hinting
at how dangerous it will be that's the
message that's coming across you it's
not so much couched in oh maybe you know
it could be really good no no the
message that's coming through is it is
terrifying the Casual viewer and
listener to this kind of thing walks
away from this message with the idea
that it is absolutely going to be a
catastrophe and we need to slow down
these people are all over every podcast
that's out there right now they're
seeping into the mainstream media I kind
of suggested I guess this would happen
soon and here's one of the first
examples I've seen of him getting onto
the mainstream media I've seen a few
others as well but uh this one was
particularly telling
they're winning the argument they're
going to influence policy and I fear
it's going to influence policy for the
worse what can be done
well let's see the end of the
conversation yeah I think the
development of machine super
intelligence is really an issue not just
for one company or even one country it's
an issue for all of humanity we we're
all in this spot together like if it
goes badly we're all doomed and because
well I think we should all uh you know
have a slice of The Upside as well so
it's an issue for all of humanity yes so
what do you think that there what is not
being said here but I know because I go
to his website I read about his policies
on this I've heard him talk before I've
read his books when he says that this is
an issue for Humanity not just one
country or one company what he wants is
a United Nations style coordination of
this stuff a very the most top-down
bureaucracy you can think of to be in
control of everything why because it's
existentially threatening to the globe
it's for all of humanity in other words
it's kind of like global warming where
you need this coordinated effort of all
the countries around the world you need
to take it away out of the hands of
democracies and have the philosopher
Kings tell us what to do it's that
important we can't leave this to the
decision making of the regular
Democratic process we need the experts
to tell us what to do and because that's
because it's an existential threat to
all of humanity that's how you get
Global government you have to hold
something above the heads of all the
plebeians the people too stupid to
understand the existential danger you've
got to hold something that is going to
be threatening of civilization before
they will give up their Democratic
rights so you have to tell them the
robots are coming to kill them because
global warming hasn't quite worked yet
or at least it's fast enough we don't
have our Global authoritarian government
until these people are convinced they
need such a thing so this is what he's
arguing there
but although he says
this is important because it could all
go badly and then we're all going to be
doomed so we need the global government
for that but on the other hand what if
it all goes well well what he says there
is if it does go well I think we should
all have a slice of The Upside as well
of course and we will as we all have a
slice of the upside of chat CPT right
now open AI is giving away the stuff for
free show this paid version but people
can use the thing for free how wonderful
is that we do all have a slice of The
Upside but that's not what he means does
it what he means is a form of Socialism
a form of Communism where whatever money
might be made by this thing should be
paid to the government and then evenly
distributed to everyone under his Global
utopian communist authoritarian uh ideal
government system that has nothing to do
with democracy and has everything to do
with people like him deciding what
benefits can flow to which people that's
what he means by we can all have a slice
of The Upside as well he doesn't mean
that we just get it via free market
capitalism which is how you actually all
benefit we all benefit from cheaper and
cheaper mobile phones and smartphones
how not because the government designs
the thing but rather because companies
compete to make the price go down and to
make the quality go up and that just
continues to iterate over time and so
you get constant improvements and
constant price reductions that's what
happens with free markets but that's not
what he's talking about I think this
conversation will need to and I think it
will broaden out policy makers are
getting a lot more interested I think
people are still to get first-hand
experience using these systems and
seeing how they get better so quickly I
think that will focus a lot of attention
on this over the coming months and uh
yes I I think you're right in saying
everyone sort of experimenting now a lot
of people know chat GPT is they're
starting to see the powers hopefully
we'll find a way for us not all to be
doomed Buster and threat to the future
of humanity thanks so much for joining
us this evening so he says there that
policymakers are getting a lot more
interested that's what he wants so he
wants this because and how does he know
this by the way he knows this because
they're contacting him they're
contacting him at his Institute to ask
for policy advice
so this is what he wants he wants to be
able to shape policy he wants to be able
to not nearly control the narrative out
there in the public but rather that's
just a means to an end because then he
can control what the governments and the
policy makers are thinking about this
stuff and therefore actually get policy
enacted now you see genuine battle is I
think that he is absolutely I think he's
mistaken this is why I'm animated about
this errors can cause very bad things to
occur in the world I don't think he is
an evil person by any stretch of the
imagination I think he's just making
catastrophic errors but unfortunately
that's been made before all of these
ideas about the end times pessimism
about people they lead like a straight
line into authoritarianism they lead to
collectivism they lead to tribal
thinking they lead to the notion that
you need to have a philosopher king
someone who's smart like him telling
everyone else what to do and how the
world can be saved this is a dangerous
way to think it doesn't work what works
is allowing people Liberty and freedom
to think of their own solutions to
things and as the problems arise those
individuals will solve the problems
insofar as there are large problems
people can freely associate and
coordinate in that way they don't need a
top-down enforced authority to tell them
to do this when the problem is obvious
we get together and we solve it together
and again he ends with the contradiction
at the heart of all this he sees there
and he says people are getting
first-hand experience using these
systems seeing how they get better so
quickly exactly right they're getting
better better in two ways one they're
able to do their job in a much more
proficient way chat GPT can have better
and better conversations but better also
morally that this is a wonderful thing
and it's making the world a better place
overall
but he keeps on insisting that this will
come to an end that eventually the
moment will come where they cease to get
better morally and it all flips in an
instant to these things are literally
existentially threatening a danger to
all of humanity they go from being
useful useful useful better better more
wonderful more interesting more unifying
of people more able to enable
collaboration between different people
enabling the people who have less
facility with writing to have more
ability to write clearly name your skill
the AI is going to be able to augment
your skill all of this is wonderful and
it's going to make things better and
better and better until until a moment
comes where like I don't know the
melting point of ice suddenly you just
hit that particular phase change and
everything goes from getting better to
suddenly being the worst thing possible
existential threat catastrophe for
Humanity and there's just no reason to
think any of that none of that follows
from anything that he says
epistemology is wrong he doesn't
understand conjectural knowledge his
philosophy is wrong he doesn't
understand what a person is what an AGI
is his morality is wrong he wants to
control people so his prescriptions are
wrong this top-down approach it's wrong
from the bottom to the top and every
angle in all directions
this is the guy that the pessimists turn
to the other people even if they're not
aware that the reason why they are
scared of super intelligence scared of
artificial intelligence the reason this
game is because he started it okay so
he's riffing off other thinkers before
that but he wrote what is really
regarded as the gospel super
intelligence Echoes of that I hear
Echoes of that book I hear throughout
these discussions that people are having
on social media and Elsewhere on
podcasts even if they don't referencing
that's where it's coming from they're
distilling out all of the stuff that he
says there in Super intelligence I would
urge people to read it especially people
who are familiar with Deutsche Papa to
understand the other side of the
argument and also to realize the
absolute poverty of thinking and
reasoning that has gone in to that book
and into that entire side of
conversation
we need more optimism about this because
I fear it's not going to be an AI
apocalypse it's going to be an
authoritarian apocalypse if these people
get their way and that will be more
destructive and worse for Humanity than
any kind of technology that will ever be
imposed upon anyone the political
prescriptions always and everywhere have
been worse for Humanity than anything
technology and the innovator support